From editorial@elifesciences.org
Date 17:17 Fri 10 Apr 2020

Re: eLife decision: 29-01-2020-RA-eLife-55588

Dear Dr James,

Thank you for submitting your article "Modelling the emergence of
whisker barrels" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been
reviewed by 3 peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by
a Reviewing Editor and Timothy Behrens as the Senior Editor. The
following individuals involved in review of your submission have
agreed to reveal their identity: Bard Ermentrout (Reviewer #2).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the
Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a
revised submission.

As the editors have judged that your manuscript is of interest, but as
described below that additional analyses are required before it is
published, we would like to draw your attention to changes in our
revision policy that we have made in response to COVID-19
(https://elifesciences.org/articles/57162). First, because many
researchers have temporarily lost access to the labs, we will give
authors as much time as they need to submit revised manuscripts. We
are also offering, if you choose, to post the manuscript to bioRxiv
(if it is not already there) along with this decision letter and a
formal designation that the manuscript is 'in revision at
eLife'. Please let us know if you would like to pursue this
option. (If your work is more suitable for medRxiv, you will need to
post the preprint yourself, as the mechanisms for us to do so are
still in development.)


SUMMARY: This compact paper proposes a a self-organization model for
formation of whisker barrels. The key idea is that reaction-diffusion
dynamics can lead to the observed topology, in the absence of
pre-defined centers for the barrels.


ESSENTIAL REVISIONS:

1. How do the authors obtain 41 pairs of gamma values (line 102)?
Are these parameters or were they inferred from experiments? This must
be better motivated.

2. The competition term chi_i requires renormalization, which seems
biologically implausible. The authors may wish to try a form such as
\chi a_i \nabla \frac{1}{N-1} \sum_{j\ne i} a_j
which does not need renormalization. Several other points about this
competition term are unclear as mentioned in the reviewer comments.

3. There should be more exploration of the model: some parameter
exploration and sensitivity analysis, and some more predictions.


MINOR POINTS:

4. The authors should explain how one gets a clean gradient along
one direction in a domain which has a non-rectangular shape.
The profile of the chemical cues should be clarified.

5. There is lack of detail about model motivation for the competition for
axonal branching (equations 3 and 4)

6. The authors should explain what happens in development before S1.
Do the authors just assume that barelloids and similar strucures
pre-exist in thalamus and deeper structures?

In addition, the individual reviews below offer several helpful
suggestions to improve the paper.

-----

Reviewer #1 (General assessment and major comments (Required)):

This compact paper proposes a a self-organization model for formation
of whisker barrels. The key idea is that reaction-diffusion dynamics
can lead to the observed topology, in the absence of pre-defined
centers for the barrels.

The model is well presented and the motivation of mathematical choices
is mostly clear. It may be worth expanding on the motivation for
competition for axonal branching (equations 3 and 4).

It is a little unclear how the misexpression experiment (Shimogori and
Grove 2005) in Panel E was done. The simulation approach and outcome
for this section is described very tersely.

The authors also mention another easily modeled experiment, in which
capybara brains lack barrels because they are big. It should be a
simple matter to do this run.

Overall I feel this study presents an attractive and compact model for
the formation of whisker barrels, which has good biological
motivation, and does a good job of reducing assumptions and molecular
guidance cues.



Reviewer #1 (Minor Comments):

The movie is helpful. Its caption should explain where the barrel
labels come from, their ordering in time, and why they wander around
before settling.

There are a few typos.
"arealization"
"amoungst"


Reviewer #1 (Additional data files and statistical comments):

n/a


Reviewer #2 (General assessment and major comments (Required)):

This is an interesting paper that with a few assumptions shows that an
old model for areal formation in cortex is sufficient to
quantitatively reproduce the patterns of barrels observed in mouse
S1. It would appear from the model that the key is the parameters
gamma_ij that are presumably (hypothesized) to be assigned at the
level of the thalamus. I have a few questions about the paper

1. Does the same model work with respect to projections from the brain
stem (barrelettes) to the thalamus (barreloids)? This would be a good
way to check the ideas. Related to this, is it true that the
barrelettes (barreloids) precede the development of the barreloids
(barrels)? It would seem to be necessary? Or perhaps, starting with a
double gradient in the thalamus and cortex and a prepattern in the
barelettes, would the correct patterns emerge simultaneously?

2. There seems to be a strong prediction in this concerning the
development of the patterns over time. Panel C indicates that early on
there are large distortioins in the shape of the barrels particularly
in D,E rows. is this known to occur?

3. It seems to me that without the chi, then possible connections plus
axons are conserved which is reasonable. But with the necessary
competition, there seems to be a flaw in the model if they have to
renormalize at each point. If axons make connections should they not
be lost from the pool forever (this is the -dci/dt the model). For
example, since the gradient has noflux in the original K&E model,
there is conservation of the total number of connections and axons of
a given type. (int ai+ci dx = constant). This principle seems to make
sense to me. However, the competition term chi_i seems top disrupt
this. Is there a way to introduce the axonal competition in a way the
prevents the unrealistic (or biologically implausible, at least)
renormalization at each step? I'd be more comfortable with the model
if there were a more physiological way to renormalize. For example, I
dont know if the authos considered something like an additional flux
of the form:

\chi (=) a_i \nabla \frac{1}{N-1} \sum_{j\ne i} a_j

This makes the axons of type i move away from type j while at the same
time enforcing conservation without recourse to some sort of
postnormalization.



Reviewer #3 (General assessment and major comments (Required)):

The manuscript studies a theoretical model within the framework of
reaction-diffusion equations coupled to signalling gradients to
possibly explain the emergence of whisker barrels in the cortex.

1. The model considered by the authors is identical to the one studied
by Karbowski and Ermentrout (2004). The only new features are the
extension of the original 1D model to 2D and the addition of an extra
term to represent competition in axonal branching.

2. The authors consider 2 guiding fields. What are their explicit
spatial profiles? Notice that since these fields essentially guide the
emergent pattern and hence their profiles, in relation to the geometry
of the 2D domain, are crucial. A different profile would certainly
lead to a different pattern. I feel that it is not enough to say
'...linear signalling gradients aligned with the anterior-posterior
and medial-lateral axes....' since the domain is 2D and of
non-rectangular shape.

3. The justification for the introduction of the extra term for
competition amongst axons (eqn (3)) is missing. Why that form? What is
the reasoning for introducing axonal competition? What essential
features of the resultant patterns are missed out if this term is
absent? Or has a different form? In the discussion section, the
authors mention, without any justification, that the conservation of
branch density in each projection is a key requirement for the
emergence of barrel patterns. This is totally unclear.

4. Related to the above point, the authors mention that the axonal
branch density is bounded by their dynamics. I presume that the
integrations on the RHS of eqn (4) are spatial integrals over the
domain. Then how come a spatial index survives in the LHS of this
equation? How did the authors arrive at this equation? Is there a
continuous-time version of this equation (like a conservation law),
i.e., one that does not make a reference to the discrete time-stepping
dynamics?

5. A typical mathematical modelling study should explore the space of
relevant parameters to demonstrate the possible range of behaviours
that the model can exhibit. This is usually presented as a
phase-diagram. The authors do not explore the parameter space (or the
possible spatial profiles of the guiding fields) in their study.

6. Throughout, the authors emphasize the spatial-locality of their
mathematical model and conclude 'Hence the simulations demonstrate how
a self-organizing system...'. A mathematical model with
spatial-locality alone does not imply self-organized dynamics. With a
sufficiently large number of spatio-temporal fields (N=42), and the
concomitant parameters, and non-autonomous guiding fields, it is
possible to reproduce any desired pattern. As such, it is crucial in
the mathematical modelling of living systems to delineate the
essential requirements from the incidental.

Reviewer #3 (Minor Comments):

In the original model by Karbowski and Ermentrout (2004), the $c_i$
represent the fraction of axonal connections. The authors in the
present study say '...the density of connections...'. The addition of
fields with dimensions of density cannot lead to dimensionless number
(as required by their parenthetical term in equation (1))
