Date:         2020-01-15 17:11:12
Last Sent:    2020-01-15 17:11:12
Triggered By: Redacted
BCC:          Redacted
Subject:      PNAS MS# 2019-22489 Decision Notification
Message:      January 15, 2020

Title: "Modelling the emergence of whisker barrels"
Tracking #: 2019-22489
Authors: James et al.

Dear Dr. James,

After an initial evaluation of its general suitability for PNAS, your
Brief Report was assigned to an editor with expertise in the subject
area of your work, who then examined the Brief Report and obtained
reviews from 2 authorities in the field. These reviews, which appear
below, were then considered by the editor, who determined the comments
were of sufficient significance to recommend rejection.

Because we receive many more manuscripts for consideration than we can
accept for publication, critical comments from expert reviewers that
cannot be easily and rapidly addressed in a revision are sufficient
cause for rejection; our goal to publish important research rapidly
prevents us from undertaking multiple rounds of revision and
re-review.

Although we expect that this outcome is disappointing, we hope that
the rationale for our decision process is clear and that you will find
the comments of the reviewers helpful when revising your work for
submission elsewhere. We thank you for choosing PNAS as a potential
venue for publishing your work and we hope that you'll continue to
consider PNAS for future submissions.

Sincerely yours,
May R. Berenbaum
Editor-in-Chief

*********************

Editor's Remarks to Author:

This paper belongs in a more specialized journal.


Reviewer Comments:
Reviewer #1:

Suitable Quality?: Yes
Sufficient General Interest?: Yes
Conclusions Justified?: Yes
Procedures Described?: Yes

Comments:

This is an interesting paper that with a few assumptions shows that an
old model for areal formation in cortex is sufficient to
quantitatively reproduce the patterns of barrels observed in mouse
S1. It would appear from the model that the key is the parameters
gamma_ij that are presumably hypothesized to be assigned at the level
of the thalamus. I have a few questions about the paper, but
otherwise, found it enjoyable and interesting to read.

1. Does the same model work with respect to projections from the brain
stem (barrelettes) to the thalamus (barreloids)? This would be a good
way to check the ideas. Related to this, is it true that the
barrelettes (barreloids) precede the development of the barreloids
(barrels)? It would seem to be necessary? Or perhaps, starting with a
double gradient in the thalamus and cortex and a prepattern in the
barelettes, would the correct patterns emerge simultaneously?


2. There seems to be a strong prediction in this concerning the
development of the patterns over time. Panel C indicates that early on
there are large distortions in the shape of the barrels particularly
in D,E rows. is this known to occur?

Minor points:

In the integrals in line 106, it should be dx, not dsigma. It seems to
me that without the chi, then possibly connections plus axons are
conserved? There seems to be a flaw in the model if they have to
renormalize at each point. If axons make connections should they not
be lost from the pool forever, this is the -dci/dt the model. For
example, since the gradient has noflux in the original K&E model,
there is conservation of the total number of connections and axons of
a given type (int ai+ci dx = constant). This principle seems to make
sense to me. However, the competition term chi_i seems to disrupt
this. Is there a way to introduce the axonal competition in a way the
prevents the unrealistic, or biologically implausible, at least,
renormalization at each step? I'd be more comfortable with the model
if there were a more physiological way to renormalize.

For example, I don't know if the authors considered something like an
additional flux of the form:

\chi a_i \nabla \frac{1}{N-1} \sum_{j\ne i} a_j

This makes the axons of type i move away from type j while at the same
time enforcing conservation without recourse to some sort of
post-normalization.


Reviewer #2:

Suitable Quality?: No
Sufficient General Interest?: No
Conclusions Justified?: Yes
Procedures Described?: No

Comments:

This study models the development of somatotopically organized
afferent projections to rodent cortical whisker barrels. The basic
question addressed is whether "barrel maps can emerge in a system with
reaction-diffusion dynamics, under the guidance of signalling
gradients, and in the absence of pre-defined centers". The simulation
approach is an extension to a 2D sheet of the 1D model published by
Karbowski and Ermentrout in 2004. The model is a relatively simple
mathematical formulation based on parameters such as densities of
axonal branches and synapses (connections), 'flux' of axonal
branching, which interact with multiple "molecular signaling
fields". I have a few specific concerns.

1) Various assumptions are made, such as the "assumption that axon
branching decreases when synaptogenesis increases, and vice versa,
i.e., that axon branches are required for synaptic connections to
form. On multiple readings of this sentence I still don't see how the
first clause implies the second.

2) "We speculate that a projection interacts with a given ephrin field
in the cortical subplate with a strength determined by the
concentration of a similar molecule at its thalamic origin, i.e., the
putative barreloid center. As such, two orthogonal linear thalamic
gradients were defined, from which 41 pairs of gamma values were sampled,
at the coordinates of 41 barreloid centers." This seems to be a
statement of what's needed for a classical chemospecificity dual
gradient. If that's the assumption, why is it notable that an orderly
map is achieved?

3) "We emphasize that the formulation of the model is entirely local;
the simulation permits information to be communicated from a given
cortical grid cell only to those immediately adjacent (via
diffusion)." It is unclear how this constraint of immediate adjacency
stems from the equations. But neither does this seem like a
biologically natural or desirable constraint.

4) The conclusion that "the present results confirm that somatotopic
map formation does not require the pre-specification of centerpoints
by as yet undetermined additional developmental mechanisms" strikes
this reviewer as neither fully convincing on the one hand, nor
terribly surprising either. Altogether, this study seems better suited
to a more specialized journal.
